blog: managing postrgres with a fsm in rust (#441)
tembo-io/website: src/content/blog/2024-03-26-managed-postgres-rust/index.md

---
slug: managed-postgres-rust
title: 'Building a Managed Postgres Service in Rust: Part 1'
authors: [adam]
tags: [postgres, rust]
image: './social.png'
date: 2024-03-26T12:00
description: Building a managed Postgres service in Rust on Kubernetes
---

> Tembo’s cloud platform is about a year old as of March 2024. However, when development started the technology requirements were only loosely defined. We knew we had to build a managed postgres service, we needed to be able to template and configure those instances of Postgres, and we needed to be able to install extensions into it. At the very minimum, we wanted our users to be able to come to our web app and create a new Postgres instance in our Cloud platform, install some extensions into that instance, and then connect to that postgres instance using a common tool like `psql`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tembo was founded in December 2022 with a mission to make the best service for Postgres extensions. At the very minimum, we wanted our users to be able to come to [Tembo Cloud](https://cloud.tembo.io), create a new Postgres instance, install Postgres extensions into that instance, and connect to that Postgres instance over the public internet.
```

Author: I like this

> Tembo’s cloud platform is about a year old as of March 2024. However, when development started the technology requirements were only loosely defined. We knew we had to build a managed postgres service, we needed to be able to template and configure those instances of Postgres, and we needed to be able to install extensions into it. At the very minimum, we wanted our users to be able to come to our web app and create a new Postgres instance in our Cloud platform, install some extensions into that instance, and then connect to that postgres instance using a common tool like `psql`.

Author: thanks. Sarah's feedback is to actually go full "PostgreSQL", so that what it will change to.

> Tembo’s cloud platform is about a year old as of March 2024. However, when development started the technology requirements were only loosely defined. We knew we had to build a managed postgres service, we needed to be able to template and configure those instances of Postgres, and we needed to be able to install extensions into it. At the very minimum, we wanted our users to be able to come to our web app and create a new Postgres instance in our Cloud platform, install some extensions into that instance, and then connect to that postgres instance using a common tool like `psql`.

Author: I was wrong. "Postgres" it is.

> We defined this very minimal requirement within the first week of our team forming, and meant we could start to sketch out some architecture for a demo’able product. Drawing inspiration from other [cloud platforms](https://developer.confluent.io/courses/confluent-cloud-networking/overview/#:~:text=There%20are%20two%20main%20ways,maintenance%2C%20and%20operations%20take%20place.), we quickly decided that we would architect the platform with two high-level components; a control-plane and a data-plane. Two early assumptions were that there could be one to many data-planes per control-plane, and that the control-plane may not always be able to reach the data plane (for example if data-plane is behind a restricted firewall), so these two components must stay highly decoupled. Decoupling the infrastructure enabled us to move quickly in the control-plane without risk of impacting the managed infrastructure in the data-plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With an early vision in place, we started to sketch out an architecture for our product. Drawing inspiration from other [cloud platforms](https://developer.confluent.io/courses/confluent-cloud-networking/overview/#:~:text=There%20are%20two%20main%20ways,maintenance%2C%20and%20operations%20take%20place.), we quickly decided that we would architect the platform with two high-level components; a control-plane and a data-plane. Two early assumptions were that there could be one to many data-planes per control-plane, and that the control-plane may not always be able to reach the data-plane (for example if the data-plane's network is private, dedicated for one customer). So, these two components must stay highly decoupled. Decoupling the infrastructure enabled us to move quickly in the control-plane without risk of impacting the managed infrastructure in the data-plane.
```

![alt_text](p0.png "image_tooltip")

## The Control Plane

The initial version of the control-plane consisted of just a web UI and an HTTP server. The HTTP server’s primary job is to service Create, Read, Update, and Delete (CRUD) requests for Tembo instances. The server’s GET endpoints do things like list all the instances that belong to an organization or all the attributes and configuration for a specific instance. PATCH routes handle updating instances with operations like restarting, installing an extension, or changing a configuration.

> All state is persisted in a Postgres instance dedicated to the control-plane. This includes all metadata related to instances in the platform such as their infrastructure requirements (cpu / mem / storage), postgres extensions installed, and any custom configurations applied to the instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All state is persisted in a Postgres instance dedicated to the control-plane. This includes all metadata related to instances in the platform such as their infrastructure requirements (cpu / mem / storage), Postgres extensions installed, and any custom configurations applied to the instance.
```

> Tembo’s clients, the web UI (hosted at platform.tembo.io), the [Tembo Terraform provider](https://github.com/tembo-io/terraform-provider-tembo), and the [Tembo CLI](https://github.com/tembo-io/tembo/tree/main/tembo-cli) all communicate with the control-plane through an HTTP interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tembo’s clients, the web UI (hosted at [cloud.tembo.io](https://cloud.tembo.io)), the [Tembo Terraform provider](https://github.com/tembo-io/terraform-provider-tembo), and the [Tembo CLI](https://github.com/tembo-io/tembo/tree/main/tembo-cli) all communicate with the control-plane through an [HTTP interface](/docs/development/api).
```

![alt_text](p1.png "image_tooltip")

## A Finite State Machine

> Managing the lifecycle of the infrastructure for a database and its related services is complex. For example, many operations in Postgres require restarts (e.g. changing shared_preload_libraries) and can be highly disruptive. Other changes should be multi-step, for example deleting a database may first require to suspend or pause the instance before deleting it. Simple HTTP request validation was not enough to model the state changes, and transitions would not only happen on requests. [Others have implemented](https://www.citusdata.com/blog/2016/08/12/state-machines-to-run-databases/) state machines to help facilitate the management of databases, which lead us down this path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing the lifecycle of a Postgres database and its related services is complex. For example, many operations in Postgres require restarts (e.g. changing `shared_preload_libraries`) and can be highly disruptive. Other changes should be multi-step, for example deleting a database may first require to suspend or pause the instance before deleting it. Simple HTTP request validation was not enough to model the state changes, and transitions would not only happen on requests. [Others have implemented](https://www.citusdata.com/blog/2016/08/12/state-machines-to-run-databases/) state machines to help facilitate the management of databases, which lead us down this path.
```

Transitions are events that move an instance from one state to another. These can be thought of as events. For example, when instances are first created they are in the “Submitted” state. When that instance receives a “Created” event back from the data-plane, it can transition to “Up”. Likewise, “Up” instances can move to a “Configuring” state when they receive “Update” events, and do not transition back to “Up” until their configuration is reported as complete via an “Updated” event. Error events can transition an instance into an error state and instances can recover out of an error state when recovered.

> ![fsm](fsm.png "fsm")

Author: this diagram is really out of date given current architecture. I'm not sure we want to recreate the diagram to be accurate to today's implementation, or just state that this was the original design, or maybe take this a different direction.

Reviewer: Something that occurred to me, it might be nice to mention we are less-locking that other providers, for example we always allow delete, allow re-configuring while it's actively configuring, and instances are done updating faster than is normal. We might use the word "declarative" or maybe that is too fancy, but I guess that's kinda what it's like.

Author: good idea. I'll add a paragraph for this, and tag you in it to take a look.

```rust
impl State {
   pub fn next(
       self,
       event: Event,
       instance: &Instance,
   ) -> Result<State, StateError> {
       match (self, event) {
           (State::Up, Event::Restarted) => Ok(State::Up),
           (State::Up, Event::Update) => {
               let desired = Some(instance.clone().desired_spec);
               let actual = instance.clone().actual_spec;
               match restart::restart_expected(&desired, &actual).await {
                   true => Ok(State::Restarting),
                   false => Ok(State::Configuring),
               }
           }
           (State::Up, Event::Updated) => Ok(State::Up),
           (State::Restarting, Event::Restarted) => Ok(State::Restarting),
           
           … other state transitions …   
           
           (State::Deleted, _) => Err(StateError::IllegalTransition(
               format!("instance {} is deleted", instance.instance_id).to_owned(),
           )),
           // undefined states
           (s, e) => Err(StateError::UndefinedTransition(format!(
               "Invalid state-event combination: state: {s:#?} => event:{e:#?}"
           ))),
       }
   }
}
```

> With a finite state machine in place, all CRUD requests pass through both basic HTTP request validation, and state transitions are validated before any database change is applied. All valid state change requests are emitted as a CRUD event to the data-plane.

Reviewer: I actually don't really know about this comma

> With a finite state machine in place, all CRUD requests pass through both basic HTTP request validation, and state transitions are validated before any database change is applied. All valid state change requests are emitted as a CRUD event to the data-plane.

Author: Sarah will be doing a copy edit pass still, so don't worry about this too much.

The early iterations of the platform were more restrictive on state transitions. We modeled our state transition, as shown below, before implementing the first version of our state machine. Since then it has significantly evolved and become less restrictive. For example, instances can now be deleted and configuration changes can be requested from any state. The Stopping and Stopped states were temporarily disabled during the migration from our own Postgres operator to the CNPG Operator. Read more on the Operator decision in our [Tembo Operator blog post](https://tembo.io/blog/tembo-operator). The ability to suspend or stop a Tembo instance is coming soon.

> 

Author: cc @sjmiller609

Read more about our Kubernetes footprint in the [Tembo Operator Blog Post](https://tembo.io/blog/tembo-operator) from October 2023.

## Closing the loop

The control-plane receives state events from the data-plane via the queue. These state events are then persisted to the control-plane’s Postgres database. Additionally, further reconciliation between the user’s desired state of an instance and the actual state of the instance happens here. For certain transitions, when the desired state does not equal the actual state, events are resent to the data-plane. In other cases, errors are logged and alerts are triggered.

![alt_text](p3.png "image_tooltip")

We continue to iterate on our platform. The Kubernetes operator, Conductor and rest of the services that make up the data-plane are open source and can be explored on [Github](https://github.com/tembo-io/tembo/).

## Moving forward

Enjoying learning about the decisions and thought processes behind building a managed Postgres service using Rust? There’s more to come - stay tuned for the next blog post in this series.

> If making decisions and solving challenges like this sounds interesting to you and you would like to help us improve our platform, reach out and talk to us on [Slack](https://join.slack.com/t/tembocommunity/shared_invite/zt-293gc1k0k-3K8z~eKW1SEIfrqEI~5_yw). We are hiring for a variety of platform and product roles and would love to hear from you.

Author: @samay-sharma
